Topological kink plasmons demonstrated experimentally

November 12, 2019

In a study published in Nature Communications, researchers demonstrated kink magnetoplasmon (KMP) architecture could be generalized to more complex magnetic patterns useful for novel integrated topological circuits.

Topological magnetoplasmonic device and printed circuit board layout.

Scientific Achievement

For the first time, high-frequency topological kink modes — kink magnetoplasmons (KMPs) — have been demonstrated in a unique device featuring biased magnetic domains.

Significance and Impact

The demonstrated KMP architecture could be generalized to more complex magnetic patterns useful for novel integrated topological circuits.

Research Details

KMPs localized at the magnetic domain boundaries in a homogeneous two-dimensional electron gas were experimentally demonstrated.

Sample processing used a scanning electron-beam and focused ion beam system, and low-temperature sample characterization used a dilution refrigerator system; both systems are at the Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM).

Work was performed in part at CNM.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-12092-x

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               electronic and spintronic devices,

                                               nanophotonics and plasmonics,

                                               two-dimensional materials,

                                               Quantum Information Science