2D-carbide MXenes with multiple transition metals

August 5, 2021

In a study published in ACS Nano, researchers synthesized a new material with tunable properties.

(Left) Schematic of MXenes discovered in 2011-2020. (Right) The new high-entropy MXene.

Scientific Achievement

The first synthesis is reported of high-entropy two-dimensional layered sheets of carbide MXenes with four transition metals each (TiVNbMoC3 and TiVCrMoC3).

Significance and Impact

This work significantly expands the compositional variety of the MXene family and provides a method of designing 2D materials with tailored and tunable material properties for diverse potential applications.

Research Details

Synthesis was confirmed using X-ray diffraction, scanning electron microscopy, scanning transmission electron microscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy.

The Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM) high-performance computing Carbon Cluster was used to compute the formation energies and explore the ability to synthesize high-entropy MAX phases.

Work was performed in part at CNM.

DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.1c02775

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               2-D materials,

                                               etching,

                                               high-entropy,

                                               multi-principal elements,

                                               MXenes,

                                               transition metals