Coherent manipulation of single electrons with optical photons

July 13, 2020

In a study published in Advanced Theory and Simulations, researchers simulated remarkably dynamic behaviors of single electrons in quantum liquids excited by laser pulses.

A single electron forms a nanometric quantum bubble in superfluid helium-4 and interacts with mid-infrared photons. An ultrafast laser pulse brings the electron onto quantum superpositions between the ground and excited states. The electron wavefunction deforms into a peanut shape or splits in two, displaying nonequilibrium quantum dynamics.

Scientific Achievement

The remarkable nonequilibrium quantum dynamics of a single electron in a quantum liquid under the excitation of ultrafast laser pulses was computationally visualized.

Significance and Impact

The simulation predicts an optical approach to manipulate a single electron state from the femto- to pico-second time scale. It also suggests a new kind of single-electron-based quantum information system with optical addressability. 

Research Details

We performed real-time density functional simulation on the dynamic behaviors of a single electron in superfluid helium-4. 

We showed that a femtosecond laser pulse can drive the electron into Rabi oscillations and force the electron wavefunction to end up at various intriguing final states.

The Carbon cluster at the Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM) was used for the simulation work.

Work was performed at CNM.

DOI: 10.1002/adts.202000008

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               laser pulse,

                                               quantum dynamics,

                                               Rabi oscillation,

                                               superfluid helium