Nanohole array could serve as multifunctional sensing platform

June 8, 2020

In a study published in Small, researchers created a nanohole array film for sensing applications. 

Schematic configuration (top) and STEM images (bottom) of the microstructure of the nanohole array film preparation process.

Scientific Achievement

A large-scale framework with built-in vertical nanohole arrays is demonstrated using a unique two-step fabrication method. 

Significance and Impact

This approach creates large-scale surface plasmon nanohole arrays. The strong surface plasmon modes in the nanostructures can serve as reusable optical sensors for trace-amount detection and tracking of biomolecules.

Research Details

Fabrication was performed at Purdue University. The nanoholes are 6 nm on average, with a packing distance of 8 nm and high epitaxial quality. 

Optical spectroscopy was performed at the Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM), and numerical simulations were performed using CNM’s Carbon cluster. 

Work was performed in part at CNM.

DOI: 10.1002/smll.201906459

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               modulated photoluminescence,

                                               nanohole arrays,

                                               refractive index,

                                               surface plasmon mode,

                                               titanium nitride