Exploring defect dynamics in 2-D MoS2

September 10, 2018

In a recent study published in ACS Nano, researchers advanced the current understanding of defect structure/evolution and structural transitions in 2D TMDs, which is crucial for designing nanoscale devices with desired functionality.

The combination of machine learning, HRTEM, and atomic simulations reveals details of atomic structure in two-dimensional molybdenum disulfide MoS2. The HRTEM sector captures the distribution of defects after 120 sec of defect growth. The machine learning sector shows an atomic snapshot after 1 nanosec of molecular dynamics (MD) simulation (blue lines are extended defects), and the atomistic simulation sector zooms in on the machine learning snapshot and shows atomic details. 

Scientific Achievement

Machine learning (ML), molecular dynamics simulations (MD), and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) are combined to fully understand phase transformations in a model transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) layer (MoS2).

Significance and Impact

A defect distribution is predicted as the driver of the semiconducting to metallic phase transformation in MoS2, and validate the prediction with in situ HRTEM experiments.

Research Details

Supervised ML performs structural optimization, identifying the change from a less stable point defect to a more stable extended structure; genetic algorithms with MD identify stable structures. The CNM Carbon cluster performed a portion of the ML calculations and atomistic simulations.

DOI: https://​doi​.org/​10.1021/acsnano.8b02844

Download this highlight

Work was performed in part at the Center for Nanoscale Materials.

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology