Borophane: hydrogenation of atomic-thick layers of boron

April 19, 2021

In a study published in Science, researchers demonstrate that the 2D material borophane is much more stable than borophene.

Left: Journal cover image. Right: Structure of borophane, with hydrogen (red) atoms on both top and bridge sites on single-layer boron (turquoise) atoms. 

Scientific Achievement

Hydrogenation of borophene resulted in synthesis of stable ​“borophane” polymorphs, which possess modified local work functions and improved chemical passivation characteristics in ambient conditions.

Significance and Impact

These findings showed borophane to be much more stable than borophene and, therefore, attractive for nanoelectronic and quantum information science applications. In addition, the analysis technique developed to unravel the complex structure of borophane is applicable to other complex nanostructures.

Research Details

Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM): Developed software tool Ingrained to use density functional theory calculations and computer vision to simulate and match scanning tunneling microscopy images.

Work was performed in part at CNM.

DOI: 10.1126/science.abg1874

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               hydrogenation