Novel 2D perovskites exhibit high thermal stability while maintaining attractive optoelectronic properties

August 21, 2023

In a Journal of the American Chemical Society paper, scientists report that cyclic spacers offer more desirable properties compared to linear ones when designing 2D lead iodide perovskites with thermally-demanding optoelectronic applications.

Phase transition and lack thereof with increased temperature in structures of 2D perovskites possessing linear (left side)  and cyclic (right side) organic spacers within a lead iodide sublattice.

Scientific Achievement

Six 2D lead iodide perovskites of different compositions were studied at 250–420 K to elucidate the effect of linear and cyclic spacers in these materials. The perovskites’ thermal behavior was found to be dictated by the identity and shape of the organic spacers.

Significance and Impact

The lead iodide perovskites with cyclic spacers exposed to increased temperatures exhibit no phase transitions while maintaining attractive optical properties, making them prime candidates as next-generation materials in devices such as solar cells and lasers.

Research Details

Variable temperature X-ray diffraction and time-resolved photoluminescence were performed for perovskites with spacers of butylammonium, pentylammonium, hexylammonium, cyclobutylammonium, cyclopentyl-ammonium, and cyclohexylammonium.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.3c02008

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology