Being exceptional in higher dimensions

December 9, 2019

In a study published in Physical Review Letters, researchers experimentally observed a continuous three-dimensional surface of exceptional points by constructing a four-dimensional synthetic space using magnon polaritons.

Top: A 3D “exceptional” surfaces calculated from measured reflection spectra with an exceptional saddle point as indicated by the black dot at the middle. Bottom: the anisotropic behavior at the exceptional saddle point, which originate from unique couplings between magnons and microwave photons.

Scientific Achievement

An exceptional surface — a continuous three-dimensional surface of exceptional points — is experimentally observed for the first time by constructing a four-dimensional synthetic space using magnon polaritons.

Significance and Impact

This work provides a pathway to engineer new quantum mechanical systems and new opportunities for magnon-based quantum information processing such as robust mode conversion and high-sensitivity sensing.

Research Details

The magnon-photon coupling was characterized at the Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM) by measuring reflection spectra in the microwave frequency range with a polariton system consisting of a specially designed microwave cavity and a magnon cavity.

Work was performed in part at the CNM.

DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.123.237202

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               dipolar interaction,

                                               spin waves,

                                               coupled oscillators,

                                               condensed matter and materials physics