Perovskite nanoplatelets show optical properties conducive to light-emitting technologies

April 25, 2023

In a Nano Convergence paper, scientists report that CsPbBr3 nanoplatelets (less than three monolayers in thickness) have optical properties conducive to light-emitting technologies

(a) Summary of optical anisotropy results for nanoplatelets (NPLs) and nanocrystals (NCs). Bar graphs show photoluminescence excitation (PLE) and transient absorption (TA) data. Anisotropy decreases with number of monolayers (MLs). (b) Plot of theoretical data for photoselection anisotropy of an ensemble of two-dimensional emitters with larger, degenerate dipole strength in-plane or, equivalently, circular-polarized optical transitions.

Scientific Achievement

This work determined the anisotropic optical properties

of perovskite (CsPbBr3) nanoplatelets (NPLs) with different thicknesses using photoselection methods. The data revealed that thinner nanoplatelets -- three monolayers and less -- have absorption and emission transitions that are strongly plane-polarized. Anisotropy decreases with number of monolayers

Significance and Impact

Dominant planar emission is a valuable asset for improving the efficiency of light-emitting technologies.

Research Details

Fluorescence anisotropy measurements indicated that the band-edge absorption and emission for ensembles of the NPLs exceeds 0.08, approaching the theoretical value of perfect in-plane polarization of 0.1.

Work was performed in part at the Center for Nanoscale Materials.

DOI: 10.1186/s40580-023-00367-5 (2023)

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology