Diamond nanofeather structure lays ground for low-cost fabrication of energy storage devices

April 8, 2019

In a recent study published in Diamond and Related Materials, researchers report that with specific pore size and ease of fabrication, diamond nanofeathers could be a great material choice for supercapacitors, batteries, sensors, and solar cells etc.

Schematic comparison of conventional NCD, diamond nanofeather (DNF), and ultrananocrystalline (UNCD) structures (left). Schematic of small grains detaching after etch, forming feathers; and cross sectional SEM image of DNF after anodic etch process. 

Scientific Achievement

A unique diamond nanofeather structure, distinct from conventional ultra- and nanocrystalline diamond (UNCD and NCD) structures, offers ease of fabrication, a high density of nanopores, and a 300-fold increase in capacitance.

Significance and Impact

The electrochemical etching method employed may offer a low-cost alternative to traditional diamond nano–structure fabrication techniques, eliminating masks and templates, and resulting in high performance materials.

Research Details

We fabricated and analyzed samples produced from NCDs grown on boron doped Si wafers, both etched and unetched, and compared a series of DNF samples with varied etch times.  

This work used Raman spectroscopy and high resolution SEM resources at the Center for Nanoscale Materials.

Work was performed in part at the Center for Nanoscale Materials.

DOI: 10.1016/j.diamond.2018.11.016

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               diamond nanofeathers,

                                               nanocrystalline diamond,

                                               ultrananocrystalline diamond ,

                                               Raman spectra