A chiral nano-propeller for precision controlled rotations

September 9, 2019

In a study published in Nature Communications, researchers developed and characterized a multi-component molecular propeller that enables unidirectional rotations on a material surface when energized.

Chirality and electronic structure. STM image of two molecular propellers on Au(111) surface showing left-handed (M) and right-handed (P) chirality [Imaging parameters: Vt = −1.2 V, It = 70 pA].

Scientific Achievement

A molecular propeller was created that, upon excitation, can rotate clockwise or anticlockwise with atomic level precision on a surface depending on its chirality.

Significance and Impact

Controlling the rotational direction of molecular machines provides atomic level understanding of the mechanism involved, and impacts their development for potential applications ranging from catalysis to quantum computation.

Research Details

Artificially synthesized molecular propellers were deposited on a Au(111) crystal surface.

Controlled rotation was performed by supplying electrical energy or by using inelastic tunneling electrons from a scanning tunneling microscope (STM) tip at Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM).

Work was performed in part at CNM.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-019-11737-1

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               molecular machines,

                                               molecular propeller,

                                               scanning probe microscopy,

                                               scanning tunneling microscope,

                                               quantum