Hot electron dynamics

August 10, 2020

In a study published in Nature Materials, researchers advance the understanding of hot-hole dynamics in metal–semiconductor heterostructures.

Design of transient absorption (TA) pump–probe studies using 530 nm excitation to create hot electron–hole pairs on gold nanoparticles and initiate hot-hole injection into p-type GaN while probing (left) the dynamics of hot holes via IR TA or (right) probing the hot-electron dynamics across the visible regime with a broadband white-light probe.

Scientific Achievement 

Ultrafast (t < 200 fs) hot-hole injection from gold nanoparticles into the valence band of p-type GaN alters the thermalization dynamics of hot electrons, reducing peak electronic temperature and electron–phonon coupling time of the gold nanoparticles. 

Significance and Impact

Understanding of hot-carrier dynamics in photo-excited metal nanostructures is needed to unlock their potential for photodetection and photocatalysis. These results advance our understanding of hot-hole dynamics in metal–semiconductor heterostructures.

Research Details

Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM) ultrafast transient absorption capabilities were utilized. First-principles calculations reveal hot-hole injection modifies the relaxation dynamics by modulating the electronic structure of the metal.

Work was performed in part at CNM.

DOI: 10.1038/s41563-020-0737-1

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               hot-electron dynamics,

                                               internal quantum efficiency,

                                               nanoparticles