Coherent gate operations in hybrid magnonics

June 9, 2021

In a study published in Physical Review Letters, scientists demonstrated a new way to tune hybrid magnonic dynamics.

The coherent information exchange (black pulse train) between magnons (shaded red area on the left) and microwave photons (shaded blue area on the right) is controlled by the DC pulse trains (square wave at the bottom).

Scientific Achievement

Coherent gate operation on the magnon-microwave photon interaction is achieved for the first time.

Significance and Impact

This work demonstrates a novel approach for directly tuning hybrid magnonic dynamics by DC gating, paving the road for practical coherent information processing using magnons in both classical and quantum regimes.

Research Details

A successful novel gating scheme is shown using a new device design with a fast-responding antenna, allowing the rapid tuning of the magnon-microwave photon interactions.

The detuning between magnons — quasiparticles representing collective spin excitations — and cavity photons is controlled by DC detuning pulse sequences, enabling fast controls over their interactions.

The Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM) magneto-electro-optical spectrometer was used.

Work was performed in part at CNM.

DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevLett.126.207202

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               electromagnonics,

                                               hybrid magnonics,

                                               magnons,

                                               quantum