High quantum efficiency photocathodes based on ultrananocrystalline diamond

February 8, 2021

In a study published in Applied Physics Letters, researchers demonstrated high quantum efficiency in photocathodes of nitrogen-incorporated ultananocrystalline diamond at moderate vacuum.

(a) Layout of the ACT beamline; (b) cross-sectional view of the (N)UNCD photocathode assembly, where ② is the (N)UNCD film with the silicon substrate and the other labeled parts are the holder assembly connected by vented screws; (c) 2D electric-field distribution near the cathode, where ① is the top stainless steel piece that holds the (N)UNCD photocathode in place.

Scientific Achievement

Nitrogen-incorporated ultrananocrystalline diamond [N-UNCD] based photocathodes demonstrated high quantum efficiency (QE=4.2 x10-4), comparable intrinsic emittance (1.00 µm/mm), and durability (year-long atmospheric exposure) at moderate vacuum (10-9 torr).

Significance and Impact 

The demonstrated qualities together with high QE at UV wavelengths make N-UNCD a promising candidate for high brightness photoinjector applications.

Research Details

The incorporation of nitrogen at the grain boundary introduces sp2 rich graphitic carbon localized in between the sub-nm-scale (<10 nm) diamond grains enabling high electron emission

Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM) resources included a CVD-diamond system, electron microscopy and Raman spectroscopy

Work was performed in part at CNM.

DOI: 10.1063/5.0029512

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               photocathodes,

                                               quantum efficiency,

                                               ultrananocrystalline diamond