Ultrafast hot electrons in colloidal quantum wells

May 11, 2022

In a paper published in Nanoscale, researchers report characterizing hot electrons (above the bandgap) by ultrafast optical spectroscopy of optically excited colloidal quantum wells. 

Transient absorption spectra of 4.5 ML CdSe CQWs taken to 1ps with excitation equal to (top panel), and above (bottom panel), the bandgap energy. Evidence for transient absorption due to hot electrons is present only for the above gap excitation. The thinner the CQW, the hotter the electrons that can be produced. 

Scientific Achievement

Ultrafast optical spectroscopy was used to characterize the temporal response and energies of hot electrons (above the bandgap) in optically excited colloidal quantum wells (CQWs) as a function of monolayer (ML) thickness.

Significance and Impact

Hot electrons enable the extraction of greater energy and increased energy conversion efficiency of optoelectronic devices. The challenge is that hot electrons are typically short lived and have varied energies in different materials and structures. This work establishes the evolution of energy vs time after photoexcitation of hot electrons in novel nanoscale CQWs of varying thicknesses, and also shows how to produce them in a controlled manner.

Research Details

•Synthesis and ultrafast spectroscopy of CQWs occurred at CNM

•A Summer Undergraduate Laboratory Internship (SULI) performed fitting and analysis

DOI: 10.1002/smsc.202100103

Download this highlight

Work was performed at the Center for Nanoscale Materials

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology