Rational Design of Robust Ni-rich Cathode Materials via Concentration Gradient Strategy

October 15, 2021

In a study published in Nature Communications, researchers offer design principles for reducing capacity degradation in lithium-ion batteries.

(a) 3D tomography reconstruction from individual particles and spatial elemental distributions of Ni (red), Mn (green) and Co (blue), detected by fluorescence-yield scanning X-ray microscopy. (b) Spatial elemental  distributions of Mn and Co in NC-NM82 cross-section sample, detected by X-ray fluorescence. (c) X-ray dark field image of NC-NM82 sample. (d) Lattice strain and tilt of the selected primary particle extracted from 5D data analysis. 

Scientific Achievement

The effects of Co and Mn on the mechanical properties of Ni-rich cathodes were investigated; results were used to regulate the mechanical stability of particles with rational concentration gradient design, and successfully resolved capacity degradation of lithium ion batteries (LIBs).

Significance and Impact

This work provides new design principles for concentration gradient cathodes towards discovery of structurally stable cathode LIB materials.

Research Details

Mechanical properties were investigated by multi-modal multi-platform elemental and structural microscopy: TEM, HRTEM, high-energy X-ray diffraction and nanoscale X-ray diffraction microscopy measurements made at the CNM and APS were correlated with 3D X-ray fluorescence measurements made at NSLS-II.

Work was performed in part at CNM.

DOI: 10.1038/s41467-021-26290-z

Download this highlight

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology