Analysis method uncovers degradation mechanisms behind perovskite solar absorber

July 27, 2022

In a report published in ACS Energy Letters, researchers determined the root causes behind the optoelectronic degradation for a lead halide perovskite.

Schematic of the SMA-STM and SX-STM approach used to investigate the optoelectronic properties of a lead halide perovskite thin film.

Scientific Achievement

Halide perovskites exhibit unprecedented optoelectronic properties, but degrade rapidly under operating conditions. Applying a unique approach to nanoscale characterization, this study determined the root causes behind this degradation for a lead halide perovskite. 

Significance and Impact

The absorption signature was detected down to the atomic level. The nanoscale characterization approach shows great potential for unraveling the optoelectronic mechanisms in perovskites under illumination, electric fields, different temperatures, or a combination thereof. This results can aid in creating more efficient, cheaper, and longer-lasting solar materials.

Research Details

The nanoscale approach to material characterization employed single-molecule absorption scanning tunneling microscopy (SMA-STM), synchrotron X-ray STM (SX-STM), and time-resolved wide-angle X-ray scattering.

DOI: 10.1021/acsenergylett.2c00866

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology