Robust differential resistance on charge density waves

December 9, 2019

In a study published in Nanoscale, researchers demonstrated that a negative differential resistance on charge density waves exists for a 2D material after voltage pulse manipulation with low temperature scanning tunneling microscopy.

Top: STM image of 1T-TaS2 shows Ta atoms in CDW. 

Middle: In dI/dV maps, a high intensity at the CDW center (-366 mV) becomes depressions at 800 mV due to NDR.

Bottom: dI/dV spectra of a, b, and c atoms. Spectra of the ‘a’ site reveal NDR.

Scientific Achievement

A robust negative differential resistance (NDR) on charge density waves (CDW) exists for a 2D material after voltage pulse manipulation with low temperature scanning tunneling microscopy (LT-STM).

Significance and Impact

CDW, an ordered quantum fluid of electrons, and NDR, which has applications in electronics, are unconnected physical phenomena. This discovery opens exciting potential applications of CDW in 2D materials for electronic and nanoscale devices.

Research Details

A 1T-TaS2 (tantalum disulfide) surface was investigated.

Atomic scale tunneling spectroscopy and atomic manipulation found an NDR appears on the CDW top sites of Ta(0) atoms forming a ​‘Star of David’-type structure.

Work was performed at the Center for Nanoscale Materials.

DOI: 10.1039/C9NR07857F

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               scanning tunneling microscopy,

                                               Spectroscopy,

                                               negative differential resistance