Quenching Defect Photoluminescence in Monolayer MoS2

October 6, 2021

In a study published in the Journal of the American Chemical Society, researchers demonstrate quench defect-related photoluminescence for single-photon emitter of monolayer molybdenum dioxide.

Quenching of defect photluminesence depends on the MPc metal, with the quenching efficiency decreasing in the order CoPc > CuPc > ZnPc, and almost no quenching by metal-free H₂Pc.

Scientific Achievement

This study demonstrates metallophthalocyanines (MPc) quench defect-related photoluminescence in MoS2 monolayers. The MPc complexes stabilize dark, negatively charged defects over luminescent neutral defects via an electrostatic local gating effect.

Significance and Impact

The results suggest attractive routes for photo-luminescent manipulation and could have applications in flexible electronics, sensors, photovoltaics, catalysts, and neuromorphic computing.

Research Details

Modeling and experimental results demonstrate the control of defect-based excited-state decay pathways via molecular passivation.

First-principles computations were performed using Carbon, a high-performance computing cluster in CNM.

Work was performed in part at CNM.

DOI: 10.1021/jacs.1c07795

Download this highlight

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology