New qubit platform could pave way for new quantum information systems

August 11, 2022

In a paper appearing in Quantum Science and Technology, researchers present a theoretical analysis showing that a single-electron qubit floating on a solid neon could achieve a coherence time as long as 81seconds.

Qubit platform configuration. An electron floats in the vacuum above a solid Ne film. Below the solid Ne, there are a metal electrode and a substrate. The red cloud represents the electron wavefunction at a mean distance d ≈ 1 nm away from the surface and extending along the surface on the scale of 100 nm.

Scientific Achievement

Theoretical analysis of decoherence mechanisms indicated that an electron spin qubit on a purified solid neon surface could achieve a coherence time as long as 81 seconds.

Significance and Impact

The theoretical results indicate that single-electron qubits on solid neon could be superior to most existing semiconductor spin qubits. Such qubits would be applicable to quantum computing and other quantum information systems

Research Details

The inhomogeneous dephasing time was estimated as 0.16 ms with natural Ne and 0.43 s with purified Ne, better than most semiconductor quantum-dot spin qubits.

Under Hahn echoes, the coherence time improved to 30 ms for natural Ne and 81 s for purified Ne.

Work was performed, in part, at the Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM).

DOI: 10.1088/2058-9565/ac82c3

Download this highlight

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               Quantum Information Science