Nanomaterial for wireless brain stimulation with X-rays

March 8, 2021

In a study published in ACS Nano, researchers demonstrated that radioluminescent nanoparticles implanted in the brain and exposed to X-rays might be used for direct brain stimulation to treat neurological conditions.

Artist rendering of wireless optogenetic control of cortical neurons enabled by radioluminescent nanoparticles (NPs). Gd₂(WO₄)₃:Eu (GdWEu) NPs act as mediators that absorb X-ray energy and then emit optical luminescence with λmax at 610 nm, in accord with a red-shifted variant channel-rhodopsin (ReaChR) window of 590-630 nm.

Scientific Achievement

We demonstrated in vivo that an optogenetic technique using radioluminescent Gd2(WO4)3:Eu (GdWEu) nanoparticles exposed to X-rays can be used for the noninvasive transcranial stimulation of brain neurons.

Significance and Impact

This noninvasive method could use X-ray machines such as those in the dentist’s office for direct brain stimulation to treat neurological conditions.

Research Details

GdWEu nanoparticles were synthesized and analyzed at the Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM) using transmission electron microscopy, energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, X-ray diffraction, Fourier transform infrared analysis and the joint CNM/Advanced Photon Source (APS) hard X-ray nanoprobe beamline.

X-ray fluorescence and absorption spectroscopy done at APS.

In vivo tests done on brains pretreated with virus encoding ReaChR and radioluminescent NPs at University of Maryland.

Work was performed in part at CNM and APS.

DOI: 10.1021/acsnano.0c10436

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

About the Advanced Photon Source

The U. S. Department of Energy Office of Science’s Advanced Photon Source (APS) at Argonne National Laboratory is one of the world’s most productive X-ray light source facilities. The APS provides high-brightness X-ray beams to a diverse community of researchers in materials science, chemistry, condensed matter physics, the life and environmental sciences, and applied research. These X-rays are ideally suited for explorations of materials and biological structures; elemental distribution; chemical, magnetic, electronic states; and a wide range of technologically important engineering systems from batteries to fuel injector sprays, all of which are the foundations of our nation’s economic, technological, and physical well-being. Each year, more than 5,000 researchers use the APS to produce over 2,000 publications detailing impactful discoveries, and solve more vital biological protein structures than users of any other X-ray light source research facility. APS scientists and engineers innovate technology that is at the heart of advancing accelerator and light-source operations. This includes the insertion devices that produce extreme-brightness X-rays prized by researchers, lenses that focus the X-rays down to a few nanometers, instrumentation that maximizes the way the X-rays interact with samples being studied, and software that gathers and manages the massive quantity of data resulting from discovery research at the APS.

This research used resources of the Advanced Photon Source, a U.S. DOE Office of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by Argonne National Laboratory under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               nanoparticles,

                                               optogenetics,

                                               Wireless Optogenetic Modulation,

                                               X-ray excited optical luminescence