Explaining the Optical Properties of CdSe Nanoplatelets

February 22, 2023

In the Journal of Physical Chemistry C, scientists report that CdSe nanoparticles show better optical features than even the best preparations of colloidal quantum dots of the same composition.

(a) Photoluminescence of CdSe nanoplatelets with thickness  of 4.5, 5.5, and 6.5 monolayers (ML) at temperatures of 295 K (solid lines) and 2.7 K (dashed lines). (b) Full width at half-maximum of the exciton line of photoluminescence at the lowest reported temperature in literature for 4.5 ML samples. (c) Time-resolved photoluminescence of the same samples as (a). (d) Literature measurements of the exciton coherent center-of-mass area of CdSe nanoplatelets. 

Scientific Achievement

Fast photoluminescence lifetimes of CdSe nanoplatelets previously suggested suppressed exciton scattering at low temperature, but multiple measurements of exciton motion confirm that excitons remain localized.

Significance and Impact

Because CdSe nanoplatelets show narrower absorption

and emission features than colloidal quantum dots, they have attracted interest in optical applications such as light-emitting diodes and lasers. Low temperature photo-physics of the samples informs underlying mechanisms of light emission and optical gain.

Research Details

Measurements of static absorption, transient absorption bleaching, and the optical Stark effect were performed between room temperature and 3 K on a series of nanoplatelet samples.

Work was performed in part at the Center for Nanoscale Materials, a DOE Office of Science user facility.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.jpcc.2c08079

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology