Molecular additive improves stretchable semiconductors for skin-like electronics

July 25, 2022

In a paper published in Advanced Materials, researchers report on a molecular additive that improves the performance of stretchable electronics made with a well-known conjugated polymer.

Schematic of chain packing morphologies before and after DOP treatment of DPP-TVT, a high-mobility conjugated polymer with aromatic planar backbone and long-branched alkyl side chains. The loosened chain packing structure improves the stretchability of the conjugated polymer.

Scientific Achievement

Under strain, stretchable electronics made with a well-known conjugated polymer containing a molecular additive, dioctyl phthalate (DOP), exhibited anisotropic charge-carrier mobilities and stable current output. The additive acted as a molecular spacer to increase the amorphous fraction of chain networks and disrupt crystalline laminar layers.

Significance and Impact

Possible applications for conjugated polymers capable of both electrical functions and deformation under strain include skin-like electronics, soft robotics, and flexible devices for energy harvesting and storage.

Research Details

Testing of DOP-treated polymer electronics showed 2.5-fold higher charge-carrier mobility compared to non-stretched material and stable current when stretched to 100% strain.

Work was performed, in part, at the Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM).

DOI: 10.1002/adma.202104747

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology