Lattice dynamics in photoexcited 2D perovskites

February 24, 2023

In a report published in Advanced Materials, researchers investigated 2D perovskites using ultrafast transient X-ray diffraction as a function of optical excitation fluence to discern structural dynamics.

Two-dimensional, lead halide perovskites comprising inorganic octahedra separated by insulating organic spacers exhibit increased diffraction intensity ~1ns following photoexcitation that conveys increased ordering upon electron hole pair formation and lattice expansion. Recovery time conveys thermal relaxation.

Scientific Achievement

Directly measured picosecond thru microsecond lattice dynamics of 2-dimensional lead halide perovskite using transient X-ray diffraction following controlled-fluence pulsed laser excitation. Found atypical lattice response.

Significance and Impact

With high temporal and high Q-resolution, we observe anisotropic lattice evolution in multiple stages. These findings provide increased understanding of the interplay between structural and photophysical properties which is beneficial for use in optoelectronics.

Research Details

Samples were spun rapidly to prevent heating and damage.

Diffraction linewidths after excitation narrow, surprisingly, indicating increased crystal ordering upon electron-hole pair formation and thermal expansion.

Work was performed in part at the Center for Nanoscale Materials and the Advanced Photon Source, DOE Office of Science user facilities.

DOI: 10.1002/adma.202202709

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology