Engineering long-range energy propagation

August 10, 2020

In a study published in Nano Letters, researchers achieve energy propagation beyond tens of micrometers with hybrid plasmonic systems.

Schematic diagram depicting a plasmonic lattice of silver nanoparticles (NP) with diameters of 80 nm, heights of 40 nm, and period of 400 nm. Inset shows multiple compact monolayers of semiconductor quantum dots (SQD) on/within the lattice.

Scientific Achievement

Achieving energy propagation beyond tens of micrometers is possible with hybrid plasmonic systems. Long-range optical energy propagation (around 600 µm) was demonstrated via photonic modes engineered by the strong coupling of excitons in compact semiconductor dot layers with surface lattice resonances in metal nanoparticle arrays.

Significance and Impact

Results from this research have potential applications in optoelectronics, sensing and quantum information science.

Research Details

Photoluminescence measurements and theoretical calculations demonstrated long-range energy propagation generated by the hybrid nanophotonic device shown in the image.

The visible and near-infrared microscope at the Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM) was used.

Work was performed in part at CNM.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.0c01236

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               energy propagation,

                                               plasmon lattice,

                                               semiconductor quantum dots,

                                               surface lattice resonances,

                                               strong coupling