Creating bright single photon sources using nanometer-sized gold tips

November 6, 2020

In a study published in Nano Letters, researchers created single photon sources for quantum communication.

Schematic of strains induced by gold-nanostars on WSe₂ monolayers.

Scientific Achievement

Nanometer-sized gold tips were used to create bright single photon emitters in transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) with ultrahigh spatial precisions.

Significance and Impact

This work will enable the creation of bright, large scale single photon sources in TMDs that could be used for quantum communication applications.

Research Details

We fabricated TMD monolayers and induced local strain fields with high spatial previsions by using nanometer-sized gold tips.

We studied the single photon emission qualities of the emitters using low-temperature single particle spectroscopy.

The study employed the photon-correlation microscope at the Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM).

Work was performed in part at CNM.

DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.0c01789

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology,

                                               dark state,

                                               quantum defects,

                                               quantum emitters,

                                               single-photon emitters,

                                               strains,

                                               surface plasmons,

                                               WSe₂ monolayers