Unconventional approach yields high-performance material for next-generation battery

August 2, 2022

In a paper published in Nature Communications, researchers synthesized a novel rock-salt electrode material by the unconventional approach of crystallization of amorphous nano-channeled Nb2O5 during initial cell cycling.

Transmission electron microscopy verified the transformation of the electrode material from a disordered arrangement of atoms (left) to an ordered, crystalline structure (right). 

Scientific Achievement

A novel rock-salt electrode material has been produced by the unconventional approach of crystallization of amorphous nano-channeled Nb2O5 during initial cell cycling. The rock-salt electrode reversibly cycles three Li ions per Nb2O5,  yielding very high capacity with superb capacity stability over 400 cycles. The unique crystalline structure also permits fast charging.

Significance and Impact

The electrode has application for electric vehicles while the new approach is applicable to creating other new metal oxide electrodes.

Research Details

Transmission electron microscopy at CNM verified the structural transformation from amorphous to crystalline phase. Synchrotron X-ray diffraction at APS confirmed the structural change.

Work was performed, in part, at the Center for Nanoscale Materials (CNM) and Advanced Photon Source (APS).

DOI: 10.1038/s41563-022-01242-0

Download this highlight

About Argonne’s Center for Nanoscale Materials

The Center for Nanoscale Materials is one of the five DOE Nanoscale Science Research Centers, premier national user facilities for interdisciplinary research at the nanoscale supported by the DOE Office of Science. Together the NSRCs comprise a suite of complementary facilities that provide researchers with state-of-the-art capabilities to fabricate, process, characterize and model nanoscale materials, and constitute the largest infrastructure investment of the National Nanotechnology Initiative. The NSRCs are located at DOE’s Argonne, Brookhaven, Lawrence Berkeley, Oak Ridge, Sandia and Los Alamos National Laboratories. For more information about the DOE NSRCs, please visit https://​sci​ence​.osti​.gov/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​/​U​s​e​r​-​F​a​c​i​l​i​t​i​e​s​-​a​t​-​a​-​G​lance.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation’s first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America’s scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC for the U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy’s Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit https://​ener​gy​.gov/​s​c​ience.

Tags:

Nanoscience and Nanotechnology