A Peculiar State of Matter in Layers of Semiconductors

The original MIT Nuclear Science & Engineering press release by Matthew Hutson can be read here.

Scientists around the world are developing new hardware for quantum computers, a new type of device that could accelerate drug design, financial modeling, and weather prediction. These computers rely on qubits, bits of matter that can represent some combination of 1 and 0 simultaneously. The problem is that qubits are fickle, degrading into regular bits when interactions with surrounding matter interfere. But new research at MIT, aided by experiments at the U.S. Department of Energy’s Advanced Photon Source (APS) and published in the journal Nano Letters, suggests a way to protect their states, using a phenomenon called many-body localization (MBL).

MBL is a peculiar phase of matter, proposed decades ago, that is unlike solid or liquid. Typically, matter comes to thermal equilibrium with its environment. That’s why soup cools and ice cubes melt. But in MBL, an object consisting of many strongly interacting bodies, such as atoms, never reaches such equilibrium. Heat, like sound, consists of collective atomic vibrations and can travel in waves; an object always has such heat waves internally. But when there’s enough disorder and enough interaction in the way its atoms are arranged, the waves can become trapped, thus preventing the object from reaching equilibrium.

MBL had been demonstrated in “optical lattices,” arrangements of atoms at very cold temperatures held in place using lasers. But such setups are impractical. MBL had also arguably been shown in solid systems, but only with very slow temporal dynamics, in which the phase’s existence is hard to prove because equilibrium might be reached if researchers could wait long enough. The MIT research found a signature of MBL in a “solid-state” system—one made of semiconductors—that would otherwise have reached equilibrium in the time it was watched.

“It could open a new chapter in the study of quantum dynamics,” said Rahul Nandkishore, a physicist at the University of Colorado at Boulder, who was not involved in the work.

Mingda Li, the Norman C Rasmussen Assistant Professor Nuclear Science and Engineering at MIT, led the new study. The researchers built a system containing alternating semiconductor layers, creating a microscopic lasagna — aluminum arsenide, followed by gallium arsenide, and so on, for 600 layers, each 3 nanometers (millionths of a millimeter) thick. Between the layers they dispersed “nanodots,” 2-nanometer particles of erbium arsenide, to create disorder. The lasagna, or “superlattice,” came in three recipes: one with no nanodots, one in which nanodots covered 8 percent of each layer’s area, and one in which they covered 25 percent.

According to Li, the team used layers of material, instead of a bulk material, to simplify the system so dissipation of heat across the planes was essentially one-dimensional. And they used nanodots, instead of mere chemical impurities, to crank up the disorder.

To measure whether these disordered systems are still staying in equilibrium, the researchers measured them with x-rays. Using the X-ray Science Division Inelastic & X-ray Scattering Group’s 3-ID-C x-ray beamline at the APS (an Office of Science user facility at Argonne National Laboratory) to carry out grazing incidence inelastic x-ray scattering experiments, they shot beams of x-ray radiation at an energy around 21,600 electron volts, and resolved the energy difference between the incoming x-ray and the energy after its reflection off the sample’s surface, with an energy resolution less than one-thousandth of an electron volt. To avoid penetrating the superlattice and hitting the underlying substrate, they shot it at an angle of just half a degree from parallel.

Just as light can be measured as waves or particles, so too can heat. The collective atomic vibration for heat in the form of a heat-carrying unit is called a phonon. X-rays interact with these phonons, and by measuring how x-rays reflect off the sample, the experimenters can determine if it is in equilibrium.

The researchers found that when the superlattice was cold—30 kelvin, about -400 degrees Fahrenheit—and it contained nanodots, its phonons at certain frequencies remained were not in equilibrium.

More work remains to prove conclusively that MBL has been achieved, but “this new quantum phase can open up a whole new platform to explore quantum phenomena,” Li said, “with many potential applications, from thermal storage to quantum computing.”

To create qubits, some quantum computers employ specks of matter called quantum dots. Li says quantum dots similar to Li’s nanodots could act as qubits. Magnets could read or write their quantum states, while the many-body localization would keep them insulated from heat and other environmental factors.

In terms of thermal storage, such a superlattice might switch in and out of an MBL phase by magnetically controlling the nanodots. It could insulate computer parts from heat at one moment, then allow parts to disperse heat when it won’t cause damage. Or it could allow heat to build up and be harnessed later for generating electricity.

Conveniently, superlattices with nanodots can be constructed using traditional techniques for fabricating semiconductors, alongside other elements of computer chips. According to Li, “It’s a much larger design space than with chemical doping, and there are numerous applications.”

“I am excited to see that signatures of MBL can now also be found in real material systems,” said Immanuel Bloch, scientific director at the Max-Planck-Institute of Quantum Optics, of the new work. “I believe this will help us to better understand the conditions under which MBL can be observed in different quantum many-body systems and how possible coupling to the environment affects the stability of the system. These are fundamental and important questions, and the MIT experiment, are an important step helping us to answer them.”

See: Thanh Nguyen1, Nina Andrejevic1, Hoi Chun Po1, Qichen Song1, Yoichiro Tsurimaki1, Nathan C. Drucker3, Ahmet Alatas4, Esen E. Alp4, Bogdan M. Leu4, Alessandro Cunsolo5, Yong Q. Cai6, Lijun Wu6, Joseph A. Garlow6, Yimei Zhu6, Hong Lu7, Arthur C. Gossard8, Alexander A. Puretzky9, David B. Geohegan9, Shengxi Huang2**, and Mingda Li1*, “Signature of Many-Body Localization of Phonons in Strongly Disordered Superlattices,” Nano Lett. 21(17), 7419 (July 27, 2021). DOI: 10.1021/acs.nanolett.1c01905

Author affiliations: 1Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 2The Pennsylvania State University, 3Harvard University, 4Argonne National Laboratory, 5University of Wisconsin-Madison, 6Brookhaven National Laboratory, 7Nanjing University, 8University of California, Santa Barbara, 9Oak Ridge National Laboratory

Correspondence: * mingda@mit.edu, * sjh5899@psu.edu

T.N., N.A., N.C.D., and M.L. acknowledge the support from U.S. Department of Energy (DOE), Office of Science-Basic Energy Sciences (BES) award DE-SC0020148. N.A. acknowledges the support of the National Science Foundation (NSF) Graduate Research Fellowship Program under Grant 1122374. M.L. acknowledges support from Norman C. Rasmussen Career Development Chair. S.H. acknowledges the support from the NSF under grant number ECCS-1943895. H.C.P. is supported by a Pappalardo Fellowship at MIT and a Croucher Foundation Fellowship. Work of Q.S. and Y.T. was supported by Solid State Solar-Thermal Energy Conversion Center (S3TEC), an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. DOE Office of Science-BES, award DESC0001299 (prior to January 2019). Y.Q.C., L.W., J.G., and Y.Z. acknowledge the support from DOE-BES Materials Science and Engineering Division, under Contract DESC0012704. Raman measurements were conducted at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences, which is a DOE Office of Science User Facility. This research used resources of the Advanced Photon Source, a U.S. DOE Office of Science User Facility operated for the DOE Office of Science by Argonne National Laboratory under Contract No.  DE-AC02-06CH11357.

The U.S. Department of Energy's APS is one of the world’s most productive x-ray light source facilities. Each year, the APS provides high-brightness x-ray beams to a diverse community of more than 5,000 researchers in materials science, chemistry, condensed matter physics, the life and environmental sciences, and applied research. Researchers using the APS produce over 2,000 publications each year detailing impactful discoveries, and solve more vital biological protein structures than users of any other x-ray light source research facility. APS x-rays are ideally suited for explorations of materials and biological structures; elemental distribution; chemical, magnetic, electronic states; and a wide range of technologically important engineering systems from batteries to fuel injector sprays, all of which are the foundations of our nation’s economic, technological, and physical well-being.

Argonne National Laboratory seeks solutions to pressing national problems in science and technology. The nation's first national laboratory, Argonne conducts leading-edge basic and applied scientific research in virtually every scientific discipline. Argonne researchers work closely with researchers from hundreds of companies, universities, and federal, state and municipal agencies to help them solve their specific problems, advance America's scientific leadership and prepare the nation for a better future. With employees from more than 60 nations, Argonne is managed by UChicago Argonne, LLC, for the U.S. DOE Office of Science.

The U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Science is the single largest supporter of basic research in the physical sciences in the United States and is working to address some of the most pressing challenges of our time. For more information, visit the Office of Science website.

Published Date

01.04.2022